File: DES.csv, comma separated plain text

Data reconstructed from Table 2 of Herbst et al. (1971) on 
adenocarcinoma of the vagina in young women. This study
sought to identify exposures that might explain a cluster
of vaginal cancers in young women in Boston in the late
1960's. This was the first study to identify maternal treatment with
diethylstilbesterol (DES) as a risk factor for vaginal cancer
in exposed daughters.  The study design is matched case-control.
Using hospital records, patients were matched to four controls 
based on birth date and type of room (ward versus private).
The matching was intended to reflect socioeconomic factors. 

Variables measured on cases and controls included

- Maternal age (in years)
- Maternal smoking (at least 10 cigarettes per day before birth; yes/no)
- Bleeding in this pregnancy (yes/no)
- any prior pregnancy loss (yes/no)
- Estrogen (DES) given in this pregnancy (yes/no)
- Breast feeding (yes/no)
- Intra-uterine X-ray exposure (yes/no)

Seven of the eight cases and none of the controls were exposed to DES.
The data summary table of the paper (Table 2) gives individual-level
data on the case from each matched set, and summary data on the controls
of each matched set. You can reconstruct the individual level data on the 
controls for any one covariate, but can not get true multivariate data 
on individuals. However, none of the controls were exposed to DES,
so we can reconstruct the individual level data on any exposure plus DES.
The analyses in the R script DES2.R are of maternal smoking and DES.
(An earlier script DES.R used bleeding during pregnancy and DES.)

Comment on this study from Breslow and Day: "The magnitude of this association
persuades one of its causal nature, even though recall of drug treatment some
20 years previously is a potential source of serious bias." 

In a video interview given by Herbst in 2011 he said they worked hard
to characterize each mother's recall as reliable -- pharma records
were essentially non-existent back then. 


Reference:
Herbst, Ulfelder and Poskanzer. Adenocarcinoma of the vagina. New England
Journal of Medicine (1971), 284(16):878-881.
